in this video let us learn what is deque
The deque stands for double ended
Queue it is a
Generalised version in Queue data structure the normal queue
will follow first in first out principle for the insertion
happens at one end and deletion happens on the other
end whereas in double ended Queue
We can perform insertion and deletion operations on both ends
so deque will not follow the first in first out
principle
It can be used both as stack and as Queue
For example if we insert the element at one end and
deleted on the other end it will act as Queue
data structure
In this case it will follow the first in first
our principle
And if we insert and delete elements from the same
end it will act as stacked data structure
In this case it will follow the last in first
out principle
That's all about deque data structure
Now let us discuss various operations on deque
There are four major operations
The first one is insert front operation which is used
to insert the element at the front
The second one is insert rear operation which is used
to insert the element
at rear
The third one is delete front operation which is used
to remove the element from front
Similarly the fourth one is delete rear operation which is
used to remove the element from the rear
Now let us discuss about which data structure is best
to implement
Double ended Queue
The deque can be implemented using two data structures using
a circular array and using a doubly linked list in
our implementation we will follow the doubly linked list version If
you're not familier with
doubly linked list concepts kindly go through the doubly linked list series
in our data structure course so that's all for this
video in the next video we will learn how to
implement deque data structure using at doubly linked list.